This is what I learned from 20 years of
being in the Navy Seals. Discipline,
drive, how to make decisions under
pressure, leadership, strategy, and
tactics that you can apply to business
and you can apply to your life as well.
So, let's go.
Jaco Willink is a former Navy Seals
officer
who uses his decades of military
training to help people become masters
of discipline and master their lives.
Your excuses will destroy you. Your
default mode should be to take ownership
because if these problems are because of
me, then I'm capable of fixing these
problems.
So, what's step one?
First of all, small steps can be
painful. Even something as simple as
going to the gym. If you're completely
out of shape, sometimes that can be
enough to make you say, "I'm not doing
it anymore." You need to envision a path
of where this can lead you to. Number
two, most human instinct is to hesitate.
But you see that problem over there, you
got to go solve that problem. It's not
going to go away. So, if you're in the
woods and you don't know where to go,
start walking. And worst case scenario,
you figure out that you walked the wrong
direction. Okay, now you can go walk in
the other direction. But standing there
not doing anything is just waiting to
starve to death. And the next challenge,
detach from your emotions. Good leaders
have control of our emotions. If I have
to yell at you to get my point across,
I've made like 47 other mistakes. My
goal is I don't have to say a word and
you already know what to do.
Is there anything else that you'd add to
that list?
Absolutely. In fact, people don't really
talk about this and this could apply to
just about anything. So if you're the
type of person that doesn't, you're
going to struggle.
Jocker, was there a hardest day while
you were in the Navy Seals?
Yeah,
that was the lowest point of my life.
Congratulations, Dario gang. We've made
some progress. 63% of you that listen to
this podcast regularly don't subscribe,
which is down from 69%.
Our goal is 50%. So, if you've ever
liked any of the videos we've posted, if
you like this channel, can you do me a
quick favor and hit the subscribe
button? It helps this channel more than
you know. And the bigger the channel
gets, as you've seen, the bigger the
guests get. Thank you and enjoy this
episode.
[Music]
Joo, surprisingly,
I couldn't find an awful lot in your
childhood that would indicate to me how
you became the man that you are today.
And I say that because there's a bit of
a stereotype that someone like you who
becomes a Navy Seal must have some kind
of traumatic early event that shaped
them to become some ultra resilient
human being. When you look back on your
childhood,
what are the sort of dominoes that fell
in that early chapter of your life that
made you the man you are today? I wish I
could positively identify the thing, the
moment. The closest I've come is that I
a little kid. I was a little kid. I
wanted to be some kind of soldier. I
wanted to be some kind of commando. And
that's I so I collected little little
soldiers, little plastic soldiers. And
one of the I had different military
units like historical military units
from around the world. And one of the
historical military units that I had was
the British commandos. And so I had
these tiny figurines and they had
machine guns and they had kayaks and
they had uh little boats, little
inflatable boats. And I thought to
myself, that's what I want to do. I I
want to do that. I I wish I could do
that. And then when I was probably
around
12 or 13, I realized you actually could
do that. You could actually get the job
of being a commando. And then it was
just a matter of figuring out which one
of the American branches had the closest
thing to what I thought was a British
commando. And the closest thing that I
found was being in the being in the Navy
and being in the SEAL teams.
And at 19 years old, you applied to be a
Navy Seal.
Mhm.
Okay. So, I have to ask a very dumb
question here, which is what is a Navy
Seal? So
there's special operations which I guess
you know from England this is the the
the SAS and the SBS. So those are the
two sort of units that we get compared
to the most. And uh so a Navy Seal is a
part of the Navy but you're the special
operations component of the Navy. And
the the term SEAL is actually an acronym
which stands for sea, air, and land.
Because even though we're in the Navy,
we are trained to operate in the sea. In
the air, so in the sea meaning we dive,
in the air meaning we parachute and
repel, and then on the land meaning we
conduct land warfare operations. And you
take all those things, combine them
together, and that's what our job
consists of. I was under the assumption
that to become a Navy Seal or to be in
the SAS, you had to have 10 20 years in
of military service. You had to have
like an established military service and
then you get some like pop up on your
computer and it says like come to this
this building over here. And so to hear
that you applied at 19 years old, I was
like, "Oh, I didn't know teenagers could
apply." Yeah. No, I I was 18 years old
when I joined the Navy and I joined on a
contract that got me sent to SEAL
training and it took a year to get
through. So I was 19 when I finished
that up.
There is there's always debates about
well don't you want someone that's more
experienced and I actually loved the
fact that I was basically raised in the
SEAL teams. It it was just awesome. It
was an awesome way to grow up. It was an
awesome way to spend those those years
of your life learning the trade that you
wanted to learn. And so I thought it was
awesome and I think it worked out pretty
well. There is a
usually the the the percentage of people
that make it through SEAL training is
about 20%. People that are under the age
of 20, it goes down to about 5%. So
yeah, I was one of those like small
percentage of people that are very young
but still make it through.
And what is the characteristics that
they're ultimately testing with the
design of that training? What are they
testing for?
Will you keep going
in the face of
whatever?
Well, they they call the uh one of the
weeks hell week, don't they?
Mhm.
So, they try and simulate hell by the
sounds of it.
Yeah. They try and simulate hell. It's
it's
they actually were trying to simulate
combat initially when they created that
week. They wanted to take as much combat
simulation from World War II at the time
and put it into a very compressed
schedule so they could create these frog
men to go overseas and conduct
operations cuz World War II was going
on. And so they needed to compress the
training cycle. So they compressed a
bunch of that combat simulation into
it's about 5 and a half days, no sleep,
lots of physical activity, lots of
stress, lots of pain, and lots of people
quit.
How many people quit in that particular
week? Mo
I would say most of the people that quit
probably of of
it's probably 80% of the quitters quit
in that week. It's been long discussed.
I think there's a book um called Grit
where they discuss what it takes in
terms of character traits to get through
these kinds of endurance tasks. And
people often think it's those that have
the biggest muscles or that do the most,
I don't know, cardiovascular exercise.
But from what you've observed, and this
is maybe a broader point about adversity
in life, is there any similarities in
the people that are able to get
themselves through adversity? It it's
there's there's some internal
drive that you either have or you don't
have. And if you have it, you won't
quit. And if you don't have it, you're
going to quit. And it breaks people. The
other thing is you might be an
exceptional swimmer
and you might be exceptional upper body
strength but you're not that fast of a
runner. They're going to find that out.
Or you might be a fast runner but a bad
swimmer. They're going to find out what
your weaknesses. You might not like the
cold. They're going to see it. You might
not like the boat on your head. They're
going to see it.
They might see that you have a bad
temper. are going to find that and
they're going to pick at that thing to
either make you come out the other side
or make you quit. It's a pretty It's a
pretty amazing
thing. It's a pretty It's a pretty
amazing thing. It's a pretty profound
thing to look at from the outside and
and and see it cuz when I was going
through it, it was just sort of I was
young. I didn't care. I was going to do
it. There was nothing that they were
going to tell me that was going to make
me quit. I never thought about quitting.
If they told me to get back in the water
again, let's go. They told me to put
that log on on my shoulder, let's go.
Put the boat on my head, let's go. I I I
didn't care. Can you teach that? That
let's go. Let's We're going to jump back
in the water. Let's go.
I think that I think that's one of the
few things that you learn in basic SEAL
training is to shrug your shoulders and
go forward.
Like, one of the things they do is
they'll they'll line you up on the
ocean. And this is in California. And
sometimes people think that California
is nice warm water, but it's not. It's
55 degrees. And I don't know what that
translates to in centiggrade, but it's
cold. And one of the things they do is
they'll they'll line you up and they say
interlock arms and you get arm- arm with
the guy next to you and they say forward
march. And you march in the water and
they say take seats and you sit down and
they leave you in there and it's called
surf torture. And you just sit there and
they'll after a while they'll pull you
up out of the water. They'll line you up
and the doctor will come down and see if
anyone has hypothermia. And if no one
has hypothermia or signs of hypothermia
yet, get back in the water. And then
they just keep doing that. And so, yeah,
it's uh what you learn to do is okay,
I'm going to go forward. There's no I
can't get out of this. I'm going to go
forward. I'm not going to quit. So, I'm
going to go forward. Bring it on. And I
think if there's anything that you
learn, it's to to
keep pushing
through things that suck. And I would
love to say like, oh, so keep pushing
through adversity, but this isn't
adversity. This is just things that
suck. It's one level below adversity.
Adversity is when you're having a
challenge. This is just something that's
going to suck, and you're going to have
to push through it. cuz I'm asking
myself if this is something I could
teach, you know, or I could be taught
because I I look at someone like you
who's, you know, done all the things
that you've done through your life and I
go, did did you have some kind of innate
advantage or can we all become Joo?
If I had to guess,
I would say no. I I would say you can't
teach it. I would say that you can grow
it. If you've got the seed of some sort
of fire,
you could probably grow and you can get
better at it. But
it's same thing. You go back to like
prison. If you've ever met anyone that
was a prisoner of war
or people that went through like the
Baton Death March, there's some people
that had a will that they were not going
to die.
They I'm not going to die. I'm going to
keep going. And and the people that
died, they they did not have the will to
live. And think about how bad things
have to be before you say, you know
what, I'm just going to lay here and
die.
That and that can get to that point. I
had a guy on my podcast that was he was
shot down in Vietnam and he was shot
down in South Vietnam, captured and so
he had to do a seven-month trek through
the jungle with his captors and at one
point he's in a two-ft tall bamboo cage
in the jungle and he's trying to fall
asleep but he can't sleep because the
rats are gnawing at the wounds on his
legs and and he shackled.
And he was with guys
that
did not have the the intrinsic will to
carry on. And if you didn't have that
will to carry on, you die.
You talked about the role that having a
why plays and I was thinking about, you
know, if I just if I just lost my
girlfriend or someone I'd gone through
some severe rejection or someone in my
life had died and their part my parting
promise to them was I was going to do
this. The role that having some kind of
reason to carry on plays in how we
handle adversity or things that suck.
Did you see have you seen any patterns
in that? Is it important? cuz there's
books behind me that literally say start
with your why and those kinds of things.
Yeah. And you know that's a
anything from oh my girlfriend dumped me
and I'm going to prove her wrong to
something that much more significant
which is my girlfriend died and I told
her I was going to do this. I'm going to
do it for her. Both those things
depending on the human being can be a
strong enough I a strong enough why to
get through. And I've I've I have
friends that were
I have one friend that was into Vietnam.
He was in Vietnam and when he showed up
SEAL training, he didn't know what it
was. He thought he was volunteering to
be like a diver, a a diver that would do
construction under under boats. He
thought that that that what it was. And
so he showed up and they're like, "This
is SEAL training. He's what's a seal?"
And they kind of explained it to him and
then he went and made it through all
that torture, all that mayhem. And why?
cuz that was what they were telling him
to do. And he was, "Okay, that's what
we're doing. Let's go." So, again, I
would love to be able to, you know, give
you this profound anchor that people
need to have, but it's like, "Oh, do do
you want to do this or not?" Which is
what I think a lot of it boils down to.
Do you actually want to do this or not?
Because if you actually want to do it,
what's going to stop you? Nothing. And
if you don't really want to do it,
what's going to stop you? Just about
anything that comes up, just about any
obstacle that gets in your way becomes
an excuse. It becomes a reason. It comes
a rationale for not proceeding down that
path. And and and this is interesting,
too. You when you talk to people that
went to SEAL training that didn't make
it, most of the time it's
some reason. There's a medical reason.
There's a family problem. There's very
few people that look at you and say,
"Oh, I quit cuz it sucked." Which is
what, by the way, which is what happens
to the vast majority of people. The vast
majority of people that don't make it
through SEAL training, and by this I
mean 80 90% of the people that don't
make it through SEAL training, they
didn't make it through because they
quit. Then there's a small percentage
that had a medical problem. And then
there's a small percentage that got
performance dropped, meaning they
couldn't perform the runs, the swims,
the the the technical aspects of the
job, and they failed. and they get
dropped. But the vast majority of
people, they quit. But they don't
usually say that. And even in their
mind, they probably don't believe it.
They probably believe, well, you know,
it was my leg and once my leg was
hurting, I knew I was going to have a
hard time on the runs. And since I
wasn't going to be able to make the
runs, I just that's why I quit. But it
wasn't really quitting. It was cuz my
leg.
So, it's it's it's like I said, it's a
very it's a very strange and and and and
really kind of a a mystical thing.
Excuses. You're talking there about
people making excuses.
Yeah.
What have you come to learn about the
nature of excuses and if they are our
friends, our enemies, if they're ever
useful,
your excuses will destroy you and take
everything that you ever wanted from you
if you let them.
Doesn't sound like a friend.
No, it's definitely not a friend. It's
definitely not a friend. It It can seem
like a friend just like your friend that
uh keeps feeding you drinks at the bar
can seem like a friend, but are they
really helping you in any way, shape, or
form? No, they're not. They're not. So,
when you when your excuses make you feel
a little bit better about the fact that
you didn't execute on what you needed to
execute on,
then they can make you feel better, but
they're not helping you. They're not
helping you at all. Is that what you
when you think about extreme ownership,
which is the title of um this book here
in front of me, is are excuses the
opposite? Excuses and blame, is that the
opposite of extreme ownership? That is
the opposite of extreme ownership.
Extreme extreme ownership is this went
wrong. This failed, didn't accomplish
this, and it's not the fault of my boss.
It's not the fault of my girlfriend.
It's not the fault of my parents. It's
not the fault of the weather. It's my
fault, and I'm going to take ownership
of it, and I'm going to fix it. That's
what extreme ownership is. And this is a
very difficult thing to do because it
hurts. Because when you look around at
your life and you look around at your
job and your financial situation and
your relationship and your physical
health and when you look at all those
things and all the problems that you may
have with those things and you say, "The
reason I have all those problems
is because of me."
That can hurt. That can sting.
And a lot of times our ego rejects that
and makes excuses and lies and then we
don't have to change anything and then
nothing changes
if someone was on the extreme end of
that disease of excuse and blame and all
of those things. Is there anything that
you could do or you would advise them to
do to kind of walk back from there to
get over the other side? Because I think
we can all think of people in our lives
and maybe even ourselves at times who
have gotten into a chronic pattern of
using excuses and blame as a form of
self-defense because we don't want to
turn that mirror back at us and have to
confront reality. Like I think sometimes
if I think about my some of my closest
friends, those that have the lowest
self-esteem will use excuses and blame
the most because it's,
you know, personal responsibility might
not in the short term at least do
anything for my already low self-esteem.
So I'm going to blame the world as
self-defense. What's step one to get out
of that? Well, unfortunately, what
happens a lot, and you you may or may
not have seen this, but I I would assume
you've seen this at some point in your
life,
people, and this is a term. There's a
term it's rock bottom, right? This is a
term that we hear for someone that's
addicted, someone that's an alcoholic,
someone that's physically let themselves
go, someone that's put themselves into a
situation with their finances or their
work or whatever, where they reach rock
bottom. But when it when it when the
excuses all go away and people can
actually confront the fact that this is
all because of me and this is it hurts
but is also unbelievably empowering
because if these problems are because of
me then I'm
capable of fixing these problems. So
even though extreme ownership hurts and
is painful, it's also liberating because
now you have control over your fate and
over your destiny and that is a glorious
thing. Is that to you how you start to
build confidence? Confidence seems to be
this really elusive thing. Confidence
ultimately is a belief you have and
these beliefs are like instruction
manuals for our life. You must have seen
in your you know in your all your years
some people really build their
confidence and I guess you've seen other
people destroy their confidence.
So what is the nature of how we build
our own confidence?
Yep. You're right. I have seen it and
I've had to do it to people. I had to
take people and build their confidence.
And so how do you do that? You know, if
you're a young officer in the SEAL teams
and you you feel like maybe you kind of
got here, you got lucky, you barely made
it through training and all of a sudden
I'm saying, "Hey, you're in charge of
this squad right here." And you don't
feel like you have the confidence to do
it. And so it comes time to make a
decision and you're sort of looking
around and the guys are looking at you
like, "Hey, you going to make a call or
what?" And finally someone just steps on
you and says, "Hey, I got it. Hey,
everyone move over to this building."
And now your confidence goes down even
lower, which is a problem. So how am I
going to build your confidence? Well,
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
take you I'm going to put you into a
situation
that I know you can handle. I'm going to
put I'm going to give you a task that I
know you can do. It's look, it's not
going to be a total softball. It's not
going to be a joke of a task, but I'm
going to give you something that I know
you can handle. And I'm going to let you
do that. And I might let you do that
two, three, four, five times. I might
say, "Hey, on this next operation,
Stephen, I want you to uh you're going
to you're going to you're going to hold
the left flank with your with your
squad. The whole everyone else is
assaulting buildings. They're setting up
external SC. You're just Hey, just you
just hold this. You just set your team
up on this burm over here
and and watch to the north. And look,
this is a pretty easy job. All right.
And so you go out there, you take your
team, you get on the burm, you look to
the north, you do a good job.
confidence goes up a little bit. Now,
look, there was no pressure. You didn't
have to make any decisions, but you did
what you were supposed to do. And I
might have you do that two or three
times. And then the next time I say,
"Hey, you know what? Hey, good job out
there. I'm going to build up your
confidence a little bit." And then I'm
going to say, "Hey, I need you to handle
security to the north
and to the west." All right? So, you're
going to have two squads now. So, I'm
just going to give you small tasks that
I know you can handle to build up your
confidence and over time you will become
more and more confident and you're going
to hit some challenges and you'll
overcome those challenges and if you do
great your confidence grow if you fail
in a challenge I might have to reset you
a little bit but this this sounds like a
big long process but it's actually
usually not that long it's actually
people kind of nod their head oh yeah I
can do this contrarily sometimes I get a
a guy who's overconfident
and you know I got Stephen walking here
like uh you're darn right I should be in
charge and what do I do with you because
now you got an ego you're not listening
to people now I'm like hey Stephen you
know since you're doing so awesome why
don't you run this whole assault team
tonight and you go yeah no problem and
then you get out there and you're not
ready to lead a whole assault team
you're not ready for that chaos and that
confusion and that mayhem and so about
halfway through the assault when there's
you've completely lost control. I might
walk in and say, "Hey, Stephen, I'm
sending Chief down there to straighten
you out." And you go, "Roger, thank
you." And you get humbled.
So, if someone's trying to build
confidence from a work perspective, we
do the same thing. Whether it's a a
business, a company, give that person a
task, a project that they can handle and
help them build their confidence. Now,
as far as you as an individual human
being, it's a very similar process.
Train,
study,
work, practice.
Train, study, work, practice. Train,
study, work, practice. And eventually
you will increase your confidence.
So I in your book you were talking about
the fact that you didn't like speaking.
You didn't like public speaking. So what
did you do? Did you sign up to go talk
in front of a thousand people, you know,
tomorrow afternoon? No, you started
small and you built a little bit of
confidence and then you win a little bit
bigger of an audience and the confidence
grows a little bit more. Little bit
bigger audience, the confidence grows
and you get to a point where there's no
audience that's going to stumble you in
any way. So that's the same process.
It's it's basically exposure therapy,
right? It's it's basically exposure
therapy where you expose yourself to a
little bit and this is you know you're
talking about Jordan Peterson exposure
therapy. I give you a little bit. I
don't overwhelm you with it because if I
overwhelm you with it, you're going to
be scared of it. I mean, if you lack
confidence and I put you in charge of
something that you can't handle, your
confidence is going to go back even
further. So, I need to give you enough
exposure that you do well, increase your
confidence, and you're going to do fine.
Whenever we're swimming, I don't know, a
couple of centimeters just outside of
our depth in any regard, we have that
thing that some people have dubbed
imposter syndrome where we start, the
story we tell ourselves about this depth
is that we're a fraud. We shouldn't be
out this far. Um, we're going to get
found out. And that can sometimes I
think if we tell ourselves that story
about whatever, you know, depth we're
swimming at, that lowers our
performance. Sometimes it can make us
our confidence decrease. What is your
take on this term imposter syndrome? Do
you think it's a real thing?
Yeah, I think it's a real thing and I
don't think it's bad. I don't think it's
bad because if once again, if you're
coming to work for me and you're like,
I'm glad you hired me. I'm ready to take
over this department. Look out.
I'd be a little bit questioning
the fact that you're so overconfident
that you're going to go in and do things
that you might not really understand.
Now, if you had a little imposter
syndrome and you said, "Hey, Jo, I
really appreciate you hiring me. Um, you
know, I haven't really done this type of
work before. Can I ask you a couple
questions?" I'd be thinking to myself,
"Okay, he's humble.
He's wanting to do a good job. He
doesn't think he knows everything." I'd
feel more comfortable with someone like
that. So, I don't think imposttor
syndrome is a bad thing. I think if you
feel it, it's actually a good indication
that you're humble and you have an open
mind and you're going to listen to what
people have to say. So that's number
one. And number two, if you feel like
you have imposttor syndrome, if you
going to
a meeting and you're going to get
assigned a project or you're going to be
discussing a project that you're really,
wait, should I even be here? Should I be
put in charge of this project? What you
do is you go into the meeting and you
say, hey everyone, I really appreciate
everyone coming to the kickoff of this
meeting. Hey, just so everyone knows,
this is my first time running a project
like this. I'm definitely going to have
some questions for some of you that done
this before. So, if you see me going off
track on something and you see a mistake
that I'm making, please let me know
because what I want is for the team to
win.
Okay, there it is. It's on the table. I
don't know everything. I'm not that
experienced in this particular thing,
but I'm humble and willing to listen,
and I want the team to do well. No more
imposter syndrome.
Is that the same in the Navy Seals? cuz
one would assume that you, you know, as
a leader, you've got to tell people what
to do.
That is
wrong. In the Navy Seals, and that is
not a good assumption. In the SEAL
teams, you the good leaders in the SEAL
teams absolutely have an open mind, want
to hear other people's opinions on how
to execute an operation, want to hear
what shortfalls there are when a plan is
presented that, hey, what about this and
what about that? And a good leader is
not going to impose plan as in fact my
standard operating procedure was to have
my subordinate leadership come up with
plans instead of me trying to come up
with the plans. In fact, that's the best
way to operate.
That means you ask them for the plan
100%.
Why?
There's a multitude of reasons. Number
one, I want you to have ownership of the
plan, right? So, if I'm imposing a plan
on you, then that's not really your
plan. I want you to I want you to come
up with a plan and I want you to go to
your team and I want you to collectively
come up with a plan that you all embrace
and understand and buy into. So, it's
going to be a better plan from your
perspective if you come up with it.
Also, if I come up with a plan, I'm in
the plan. So, when I'm in the plan, I
can't see the plan as well. I want to be
outside the plan looking at it from the
outside from a different perspective
where then I can see the holes in the
plan and I can ask you some questions
about the plan that you came up with.
And finally, if I'm coming up with a
plan, if I'm staring down at the map
coming up with a plan, well, who's
looking up and out? Who's looking at the
followon operations? Who's looking at
where our our other units are out in the
battlefield? Who's checking on the
intelligence that we're gathering about
the enemy? If I'm looking down and in,
I'm not looking up and out. If I'm
coming up with a plan myself, I'm
looking down and in. If I'm letting you
come up with a plan, I can look up and
out. You can look down and in. And we
can have a lot more awareness of the
battlefield.
Often leaders and managers, we get, I
think, caught up in
in the proverbial trenches. We get a
little bit too close to the painting, so
we can't see the picture.
How important do you think it is to be
the leader that's able to take a step
back?
That is the job of a leader. That is the
job of a leader to take a step back,
detach from the situation and
see the entire picture of what is
unfolding or what is being planned or
what is happening.
If you are in the problem, you won't see
the solution to the problem.
it it you we will very rarely. So you
have to be able to detach. And that's
one of the the main things that I tried
to teach young leaders when I was in the
SEAL teams. It's the same thing that I
try and teach leaders now is to take a
step back, detach from the chaos, detach
from the mayhem, detach from your
emotions, detach from your ego, and be
able to assess the best way to execute
and
give, you know, the book, the book is
called Extreme Ownership that you
referenced. That doesn't mean that I do
everything myself.
In fact, what I want to do is I want you
to take ownership. And how do I get you
to take ownership? I give it to you.
Hey, Stephen, how do you want to run
this project?
And and listen,
what if you come up with a terrible
plan? Oh, no. No. Let's say let's say
you come up with a let's say I come up
with like I in my mind I've got
something that's going to be a 95%
solution. And I say, well, you know, I'm
going to delegate. So, Stephen, how do
you want to do this? And you come up
with like an 80% solution. Now, what
should I do?
I'll tell you. I'll still let I'll still
run with your plan. I'll be like, "Okay,
Stephen, sounds good." If you come to me
with a 70% plan, I might say, "Hey,
Stephen, what about this?" And you go,
"Yeah, I'm going to make adjustment
there." And all of a sudden, we got it
to a 78% plan and we're still good. If
you come to me with a 20% plan now, I
can ask you three or four questions
before you say, "Hey, Jo, let me I'll be
back in a couple hours. I'm gonna go
reformulate this thing." And by the way,
all that's training you, right? All
those questions are training you. You
coming up with a plan is training for
you. Because if if I'm got people that
work for me and they can't come up with
a plan by themselves, I'm complete
failure as a leader. So, I'm going to
train you so that you can come up with
plans and I can look up and out.
takes a lot of patience, doesn't it?
Because you know, you know, in those
many of those situations that you're not
going to get from A to B as fast as you
possibly could have.
It's a investment in a long-term
efficiency because even though I might
have to invest a little bit more time
right now and I spent 10 minutes
explaining to you why this tactic would
be better than that tactic, even though
it's going to cost me 10 minutes right
now or maybe a half an hour, we look up
in 6 months and you're actually coming
up with better plans than me.
You know, I read throughout your books
you went from being that young teenager
who passed training to really like
leading the Navy Seals in many respects.
Well, leading an element of SEALs. Yeah,
that's um when you look back on that
accomplishment,
have you figured out what it is about
you in particular
that allowed you enabled you to do that?
Is that something? Is that Is there a
muscle you grew?
I was I'm a hard worker.
I,
you know, I I was never great at
anything like as a kid. I wasn't the
fastest. I wasn't the strongest. I
wasn't the smartest.
But I did I did know that I could work
hard. I had to work hard and I listened
to people. I didn't think I knew
everything. I I even sometimes I'll joke
about, yeah, you know, when you're young
and arrogant, even when I was young and
arrogant, like we all are when we're 23
years old or 22 years old and you're
young, you think you know everything.
Even then, I always had that little like
you don't know everything. And I think
that humility paid a played a big role
in me being able to be successful
because I was never afraid to say, "Hey,
I'm not 100% sure what to do right now.
What do you guys think?" Or, "Hey, I
feel like I've reached the limitations
of my thought process. I need some
help." And so, I think that's one of the
main reasons that I was able to to to do
a good job to do to do a good job. When
I meet someone like you, I I wonder I
go, "This guy must have seen so many
things. So many things that the average
human being will absolutely never see,
you know, and I cuz you were you were
sent all around the world on some
absolutely incredible unimaginable
missions for for 20 20 years for for the
average person who has no idea what your
eyes have seen.
Can you paint me a picture of some of
those extremes?
Well, it's war.
So,
it's it's war.
It's
people being wounded, people being
killed in Iraq with the insurgents that
we were fighting. It's them
torturing people, mutilating their
bodies, raping
beheading people
horror.
But you know, it's interesting when when
I talk to other people, when I meet
people, I always think to myself,
what you're saying that you think when
you see me, I always think that when I
see other people because
other people, we don't know what they've
been through. You don't know what kind
of childhood they've had. You don't know
what kind of horrors they've seen. You
don't know what kind of abuse they've
suffered. you don't want to kind of you
don't know what kind of trials and
tribulations other people have faced. So
I I don't I I look at everyone and and
and also the trials and tribulation that
someone face someone faces
that that's profoundly difficult for
them regardless of what it was
regardless of if they were a a person
that you know got injured really bad.
they're when they were in high school,
they're 15 years old and they broke
their leg and they they they couldn't
play their sport anymore and now they're
17, but that was a traumatic thing for
them.
And yeah, so when I when I look at other
people, when I talk to other people, I
always think everyone everyone every
human faces challenges and you don't
know what they've been through and they
they might have been through things that
are worse than what I've been through.
And I usually my assumption is people
have been through a lot of challenges
and
they they persevered through it and here
they are. So I'm going to give them the
benefit of the doubt.
But humans aren't supposed to be exposed
to those kinds of images. And I think if
you spoke to, I know a trauma
psychologist, they would they would
class a lot of those things that you've
seen as what they call like tort
traumas, like really really traumatic
events. How how does someone like you go
about processing those things to ensure
that that trauma doesn't show up in
later life? You know, we talk about
soldiers coming back from war suffering
with PTSD and things like that. What
have you done to sort of insulate
yourself or at least help you understand
some of some of the things you saw?
There's evil in the world.
when there's evil people in the world
and evil people are going to do heinous
and atrocious things
and that's a reality and that's always
been the reality
and the best thing that I can do is well
when I was in the military do my best to
to stop that kind of atrocious behavior
and
when and I'm out of the military. Try
not to try and
help people move away from those
thoughts. I mean, when you're talking
about like your my my family like my
family didn't
they my wife wasn't tracking what was
going on when I was overseas. She didn't
know what was happening
most of the time. you know, when my guys
got wounded or my guys got killed, she
knew. She went to their she went to the
hospital to visit them. She went to
their funerals, but I wasn't dragging
her down
the the
to the depths of human nature.
I took that and same with my kids. I
didn't share with them that these things
happen. So, and and that's so so I think
from my perspective,
you know, it's like the reality of the
world is yeah, there's evil people in
the world.
I accept that reality. I understand that
reality. There's also good people in the
world and there's people that do amazing
things. There's people that sacrifice
their lives for their friends
and that's part of humanity.
So I like to focus on that part of
humanity rather than
the dark side of humanity. But if you
really want to appreciate the
the light and the good, then you have to
recognize that there's darkness and
there's evil.
Was there a hardest day while you were
in the Navy Seals? Is there a day you
look back on and say that was the the
most sort of emotionally testing day?
Yeah. Losing guys in combat
and that stays with you?
Oh yeah.
Always.
I just can't imagine,
you know, I just can't I've never lost a
friend. I've got two older brothers.
I've never lost my brothers. I just
can't imagine. I can't imagine how
difficult it is to like go forward when
you've lost, you know, you refer to
these people as your brothers
and
I'm not unique.
And the guys we were over in the Battle
of Amati when we were over there, the
the Army and the Marine Corps, they were
losing guys every day. This is not
unique. I'm not unique. There's guys
that were in charge of units that lost
10, 12, 15 guys.
And
it's not unique for human beings either
because even though you haven't lost any
friends, you haven't lost any of your
brothers,
you will.
This is part of life.
And so
this is part of life.
people have, you know, everyone's died
and in combat people have died and
people carried on
and I know that my friends that died,
they would not want me to sit around and
mourn and and and
break down and drink and and and pop
pills. They wouldn't want me to do that
at all. They'd want me to live. That's
what they would want. They would want me
to live. They want me to go out and make
things happen
and and drive on and enjoy and surf and
play guitar and do jiu-jitsu. That's
what they'd want me to do. 100%. 100%.
In fact, they would be disgusted
if what I did with the gift that they
gave me was piss it away. They'd be
disgusted. And I won't do that. Not Not
a chance.
I'm going to live like they would want
me to.
In those moments,
that's certainly what logic tells you.
But those moments, it's hard to be
logical in those moments, right?
Yeah.
I
ended up with some pattern recognition
on this whole scenario.
Unfortunately, because when you lose
friends over and over and over again,
you start to see what happens from an
emotional perspective, from a spiritual
perspective, from a physical
perspective.
And what I what I
began to recognize as a pattern is and
the way that I explain this to people
that go through loss like this is you're
going to have you're not going to be in
control of your emotions sometimes. So,
and since you're 31 years old, you've
had control pretty good control over
your emotions since you were 7 years old
or 8 years old. Occasionally you'd break
down. Occasionally you'd lose your
temper. But you've gotten more and more
in control the older you've got gotten.
So you're not used to not being in
control of your emotion. We as adults
are not used to losing control of our
emotions. So what's going to happen? You
lose one of your friends. You lose one
of your family members. You're going to
get hit with a wave waves of emotion
that you can't control.
And this sometimes
causes people to to
really overreact
and think that they're in this terrible
place cuz they think, "Oh my gosh, I've
been able to control my emotions for the
last 30 years and now I'm losing now I'm
I'm I can't control my emotions. There's
something wrong with me." Is what they
think.
And this is what I learned is that those
waves of emotion,
they're gonna they're gonna roll back
and you're gonna you're going to get
control again. You're going to take a
breath and then you're going to get hit
with another storm, but it's going to go
away. And you're going to get hit with
another storm, but it's not going to be
as strong.
And then it's going to go away. And
you're going to get hit with another
storm, but it's going to be a longer
period of time. and it's not going to be
as strong.
And what this is is this is your
this is you processing what happened.
And eventually you do get you regain
control of your emotions. And there's
still going to be times there's still
going to be times where you're going to
be 3 years, 5 years, 10 years down the
road, you're going to hit with a wave of
emotion and
you're going to be caught off guard.
It's going to catch you. I had a guy on
my podcast
that was in World War II, Korea, and
Vietnam.
And so we were we we talked about World
War II where he was, you know, a young
private soldier. And then he was a
little bit more senior when he was in
Korea. And then in Vietnam, he was a
battalion commander. So he's in charge
of 700 guys.
and we we were talking and I I I said
something along the lines of I I asked
him something about his the casualties
that he took in his battalion. And so
now this is you know he was in Vietnam
in I don't know 1967 or 1968 so it's
been 60 years
and I asked him about casualties that he
took and he got choked up.
Got choked up. lost control of his
emotions for a for a second. And when I
saw that,
I felt so relieved.
I felt so relieved because I thought,
"Oh, it's always going to be like this."
And that's okay. It's okay. It's okay.
It's normal. Lost your friends, lost
your brothers.
Is it Is it Is it wrong that you get
choked up when you talk about There's
nothing wrong with that. Here's a guy
that lost his lost lost some of his men
60 years ago and he's getting choked up
right now. Why? Cuz he loved him.
Cuz he he wishes he could have brought
him through that conflict and he didn't
and he feels it and he lived a normal
life. Retired from the army, got follow
on jobs and had another career.
But he lost his friends, his brothers,
his men, and that hurts. And it's not
going to go away. And that's okay.
There's nothing wrong with you. Nothing
wrong with me. There's nothing wrong
with me. Do I get choked up sometimes?
Sure. Yeah.
Yeah.
I lost some of my best friends.
Does that hurt? Yep.
Do I wallow in that? No.
Do I dwell in those emotions? Nope. I
don't. And they wouldn't want me to. and
they'd be disappointed if I did.
I think it's really important because as
men we we don't we get conflicting
messages about emotion and how to
express it and what that looks like and
if there's weakness to certain emotions
or if you know but the it's the
psychology seems to be pretty clear that
the suppression of these emotions, the
trying to hide them, the total
compartmentalizing of them doesn't
actually make them goes go away. They
just appear somewhere else in a bottle
or in some kind of recreational drug or
somewhere else. So, and nor does
suppressing them isn't going to help.
And nor is letting them run your life.
So,
because you're sad now you're going to
make a bunch of bad decisions cuz you're
sad. No. No. It doesn't doesn't work
like that. Doesn't work like that.
You're sad. Okay.
You get emotional sometimes. Okay. Got
it. Now, get control of your emotions
and carry on with your life. And
sometimes you're going to get hit with
those waves, and that's okay. I I think
that's a big misconception
and sort of relates to what you're
saying.
Oh, I'm I'm having an emotional moment
right now. There's something wrong with
me. No, there's nothing wrong with you.
There's nothing wrong with you. The
other extreme is, oh, I'm letting my
emotions run my life and I'm making a
bunch of bad decisions and my excuse is,
well, you know, I lost some friends or I
had this traumatic experience happen to
me. That's why I'm doing that's just an
excuse and it's a very easy excuse. And
in society, the last thing I want to say
to you is, well, you can't act like
that. Oh, you lost one of your friends.
Hey, that doesn't mean you can make
excuse. You can't use that excuse. No, I
I go,
"Hey, man. Uh, okay." It's what I say,
right? I'm a polite person. I'm
empathetic person. You're sad. You're
making bad decisions. You're saying it's
cuz you lost your friend or you went
through this traumatic thing. And I go,
"Okay, I
how can I help?" Instead of saying,
"Hey, man. Yeah, guess what? It's time
to carry on."
Don't Don't dwell on the I I I've told a
thousand veterans this. Remember, don't
dwell.
Remember, remember your friends. Don't
dwell in the past, though.
Remember, don't dwell. That's what we
have to do.
And the emotions. Yes.
Embrace those emotions, but don't let
those emotions embrace you.
Don't let those emotions run your life.
There is there is a cuz people say, "Oh,
uh, suppressing your emotions is bad."
Okay, so I'm just going to let all these
emotions out and they're going to run my
life now. No, no, no. At a certain
point, you say, "Okay, my emotions are
now leading me down the wrong path.
I'm in control.
I'm not going to allow my emotions to
make my decisions." They're in the
calculus. I'm not saying take your
emotions out of the calculus, but they
have to be one component of your
calculus, not the whole equation. The
equation has to include emotions. Yes.
Logic, yes. Future, yes. Goals, yes.
Family, yes. Work, yes. Finances, yes.
All those things have to be in the
calculus. Emotions has to be a part of
the that calculus. You can't pull them
out of there or they'll bite you. But
you can't make them the overwhelming
denominator of everything that you do or
it's going to be problematic.
I heard you tell a story which I thought
was really inspiring. Actually, I was
just listening to it before you came
about a friend of yours who was going
through hardship in their life and you
your advice for them was to start
walking.
Yeah.
Yeah. It was a guy who was Yeah. going
through hardship with his job, with his
marriage, and the marriage was coming to
an end. The job was not was going to
come to an end as well. And he's out
there and doesn't know what to do.
And the analogy that I set up for him is
if I'm in the woods, which is where you
are right now, you're in the woods and
you don't know where to go cuz the
wife's not there anymore. The job's not
there anymore. You don't know where to
go right now. So if you're in the woods
and you don't know where to go,
start walking.
You got to start walking because the
perspective is not going to change. You
have to start moving forward. You have
to t start start taking steps in order
to improve your vision, improve your
perspective, change your perspective,
make some kind of progress. And worst
case scenario, you figure out that you
walked the wrong direction. Okay, now
you can go walk in the other direction.
And that's that's going to be fine. But
standing there lost and not doing
anything is just waiting to die, waiting
to starve to death.
Don't let that happen.
It's overthinking. It's that anxiety.
It's that ruminating that I think I've I
mean I've done it multiple times in my
life when the solution is I can't get to
certainty on the problem. So I I try and
think my way out of the problem which
only seems to cause more harm than good.
Yeah. There's definitely a level of
risk conditioning that you get inside
the military because there's you're not
you're just not going to be certain
about anything. And you have to be able
to say, "Yep, I'm going to make this
decision right now and here's what we're
going to do. I'm going to make the
smallest decision possible. Going to
take the smallest step possible, but I'm
going to take a step because I'm never
going to know everything. And if I take
the time to try and know everything,
everything will have changed by the time
I know it. So, I'm going to absolutely
take that step and take that action.
I mean, that's a metaphor for life as
well, cuz there's a lot of people trying
to get to 100% certainty whether to
leave the job or the marriage or the
start the business and they're
struggling maybe at 60 70 maybe 80 90%
certainty. But for some reason, we seem
to need,
you know, certainty.
That's why I use the what I what I call
the iterative decision-m process. I'm
only to take small steps. So,
am I trying to leave my I don't like my
job. I'm miserable there. Okay. Does
that mean I walk in tomorrow morning and
say, "Hey, boss, I hate it here. I
quit." No, it doesn't mean that. It
means I say, "Okay, I'm going to start
putting my resume together.
I'm going to start checking out
LinkedIn.
I'm going to start seeing what
qualifications I might need that could
improve my ability to get a new job.
Once I've done that, I'm going to start
sending out my resume. I'm going to
start building some relationships with
some people. And now I look up and I get
another job offer. So, I didn't make a
crazy short-termed emotional decision. I
made a slow, progressive, iterative
decision-making process that led me from
a situation that I didn't like to an
opportunity that seems more promising.
And this could apply to just about
anything.
I see this a lot in businesses. I see
that the the real cost in business. I
spent about 10 years working in
marketing. So I was my job was to work
with the CMO and the CEO helping them to
try and make certain marketing
decisions. You know that invest in this
platform, do this thing, whatever. And I
came to learn over time that the biggest
cost wasn't making a bad decision. It
was the time you waste the nine months
waiting for Joanna to get back from
annual leave so we can have a meeting
with Dave and procurement to get the
invoice signed off versus the CEOs that
I worked with that said, "Let's do it
now." When the decision was quite
clearly
low cost, relatively low cost or
reversible.
Mhm.
It was always speed that seemed to to
pretty much speed that seemed to win out
because most decisions are either
reversible or actually more
inconsequential than you think. Very few
decisions are final. Very few decisions
are final. Even something like buying a
house. Should I buy this house? Oh my
gosh, it seems if you buy a house and
you decide it wasn't the house that you
wanted, you sell the house.
It's like now look, could you get caught
in a bad market and could Yeah, that can
absolutely happen. So, you need to be
smart about your decisions that you
make. But most things are not as final
as they seem. Most things you're going
to be able to and will you look you paid
the realer so you lost 3% there. You
paid the other realer, you lost 3%. You
had to pay the mortgage fees. So you're
going to lose some money, but it's not
like you buy a million- dollar house and
then you decide you don't like it. You
don't lose a million dollars. You lose
80 grand or whatever, you know, and it's
okay. Two years, three years, you get it
back. What? So people think of decisions
as being permanent. Yeah. If you're if
you're in marketing and you approach me
and you say, "Hey, listen, CEO, there's
a new marketing
opportunity that we'd like to get you
into." And I go, "How much did it cost?"
And you say, "A million dollars." And I
say, "Oh, that's a lot of money. Can is
there can I try it for a shorter period
of time?" "Well, yeah, but you won't get
as much for your for you won't get as
much volume." And I say, "Okay, well,
still I don't want to invest that much
cuz I'm not sure about it. Let's test it
and see where it goes." and you say,
"Okay, we'll try that. Here's 100 grand
and let's see what feedback we get, and
if it's good, it's good. If it's not, we
go somewhere else." Do you think you're
conditioned in some ways to have this
sort of um bias towards taking action?
Because if your background in the seals,
there was often some kind of time
urgency. There was some factor that's
causing you to have to take a decision.
Is that
Yeah.
In business and life, there's not
there's not like we're going to lose
this or someone's going to die or
there's going to be an attack. In the
business world, the consequences are
prolonged and usually not as extreme.
So, you can get away with less action
even though eventually it will catch up
with you. And you've got an example of
that in your book. And the the
father-son deal and one of them takes 9
months to execute and the other one
executes immediately. And the one that
executes immediately is successful. The
one that doesn't takes nine months to
execute fails. So it eventually inaction
will cost you in and you say
interestingly that oh in the SEAL teams
you must be conditioned to do this. I
had to condition people to take action
even in the SEAL teams. Even a young
SEAL leader who you would think would be
by nature aggressive and an action
taker. You put them in a pressure
situation where there's not a ton of
information and they need to make a
decision. They don't want to act either.
So, one of the things that I would teach
was that their default mode was to be
aggressive. Their default mode was to
take action. I would teach that. Same
thing we just discussed. I wouldn't say,
"Hey, look, that means you have to take
action." But your default setting should
be I'm going to do something. Cuz I'd
have a young SEAL officer and there'd be
some training mission and there'd be a
problem in a building and there'd be a
bunch of paintball flying around in
there and he wouldn't want to go solve
that problem. he'd back away from that
problem and I would have to go like push
him in the back and say, "You see that
problem over there? You got to go solve
that problem." It's not going to go
away. You got to be aggressive. That's
got to be your default mode is to take
action and make things happen because
most human instinct is to wait. Most
human instinct is to hesitate. Most
human instinct is to let things go
longer and stick with the status quo.
that seems to be on the on the front the
lowest risk
in the situation is to not do anything.
It usually appears to be the lowest
risk. But just like the example that you
gave in your book, it's it definitely
seems lower risk. Oh well, he wants
money, wants investment, new thing and I
don't know the lowest risk in that
situation is to not do anything. And
that's what many people do whether
they're in the SEAL teams or whether
they're in business. So to train people
to oh I need to take risk some level of
risk take action because in the long run
I say seven out of 10 seven out of 10
times action is better than inaction 70%
of the time action there's definitely
times where you got to hesitate there's
definitely times where you got to hold
back there's definitely and that's the
other book you got there is called the
dichotomy of leadership because there's
times yes absolutely action
aggression there's also times the other
end of the spectrum was like, "Yep,
now's not the time to make a move." So,
it's it's definitely a dichotomy, but
the
to me 70% of the time, you better take
that action. That's got to be your
default mode.
I asked you what your your hardest day
in um the seals were and you said about
losing friends, what was what was your
proudest day? Is there a proudest day
where you go, do you know what? I I
really showed up in a in a way that I to
a standard that I held myself to. And
because I did, we accomplished something
great together
against the odds. There's a a multitude
of times where I was in Iraq.
I was in a detached moment in time,
you know, moving down a street,
sitting in a vehicle,
maneuvering, and I was and I was
watching my guys.
I could see my guys and I could see what
they were doing.
And I could see
one of the most beautiful things in the
world, which was guys that were
exceptional at their job, working
together as a team, maneuvering,
protecting each other, accomplishing the
mission.
And I got to see that many times. And
that's always had nothing to do with me.
Had to do with them. Had to do with
being able to see.
Look, were we perfect? No. But were
there moments
when you see an element cover and move
for each other
on the battlefield?
A simple plan with the right priorities
with decentralized command. Was there
times when I got to see all those
things?
Yes. And that without a doubt, those
were those are the best days.
Says something about, you know, and I
think I've kind of seen this throughout
your work is you have a real focus on
service, serving others as a path to I
guess fulfilling yourself. And we often
think I think many people think in life
that the path to self-fulfillment is to
serve yourself. But it seems like you've
kind of figured out that the path is by
serving others.
Yeah, I think that's
there's there's an underlying
core
component and belief and and innate DNA
in the SEAL teams
and that is you take care of your you
take care of your friends
and and that's not
in fact if you're the type of person
that doesn't take care of your friends,
you're not going to be a good seal.
you're not going to be a good seal if if
you put yourself before the team. Look,
you can be a great shot, you can be
strong, you can be fast, all those
things, but no one's going to really
want you in a platoon if you put
yourself above them. And people don't
really talk about that. No one ever told
me that, but you feel it. And if you're
if you're not self-aware,
you could you might slip into where
you're looking out for yourself and it's
a problem. And this happens in life,
too. You know, if you're if you it
happens in business where I see a guy
that he's taking care of himself
and and
you know, it's a smart guy and he
usually thinks he's pretty smart and
usually thinks he's a little bit smarter
than everybody else and usually thinks
that no one else is going to notice that
he's taking care of himself and
everybody sees it. Yeah.
And they dig themselves a grave. They
they dig themselves to graves and they
I'm not saying they don't get away with
it a little bit. Usually they get a
couple promotions, you know, they get to
a spot, but ultimately people don't want
to work with that person and so they
burn their relationships and they don't
do as well as they should.
And which is the the kind of nice thing
is if you take care of other people,
they'll take care of you. If you screw
other over other people, you're you're
gonna get screwed over. So, yeah, I
think there's a there's there's
definitely that underlying theme in the
SEAL teams. I've seen it now in
business.
And it is it is
it is going to if you if you look out
for yourself all the time, it's going to
catch up with you. I think everyone can
relate in this. If anyone's ever worked
in a business and they have colleagues,
I think everyone will be able to think
about the colleague who is always
seeking credit is um is always you know
being selfish in the way that they're
showing up and then they can also think
about the colleague who's the complete
opposite of that and it's often it's
funny it was making me think as you were
speaking that leadership is in fact in
many respects it's given it's not taken.
I.e. the person that's showing up for
other people but also delivering on
their own work is often kind of elected
the leader of the group. This is you
know we talk a lot in business I think
it was Steve Jobs that said the very
very best leaders in my organization
were those that were so good at their
job and they were never thinking about
like being a leader but that's the
reason they ultimately became it.
Yeah. Uh when people ask me and I got a
I got a book I wrote called leadership
strategy and tactics. It's like how to
get promoted. How do you get promoted?
Don't worry about getting promoted. to
focus on the team, focus on the mission,
focus on doing a good job, focus on
supporting your teammates. If you do
those things, you're going to get
promoted. And it it takes you'll have
this, you know, the dark part of your
personality will say, "Yeah, but they're
not going to notice. They need to see me
now." And you'll raise your hand and
say, "I want credit for that." And the
minute you do that, the minute you raise
your hand and say, "Give me credit,"
your credit goes down. It's an
unfortunate truth. The minute you ask
for the accolades, your accolades are
decreased because every you're looking
out for yourself and everyone can smell
that and they don't like it.
Yeah. You're saying that the miss I'm
more important than the mission in some
respects.
Terrible. Terrible.
Did you have people like that in the in
the services when you were you were out
there? People that were clearly selfish
in the seals?
Absolutely. Y
how did you deal with that?
Well, if they were my boss, then I would
make them look good,
build a good great relationship with
them. If they were my peer, I'd make
them look good, build a great
relationship with them. If they worked
for me, I'd make them look good, build a
great relationship with them.
I think that as you you know some people
that have that kind of um
you know they've got some kind of
is it a defect? I think it's probably a
little bit of a defect but they they
just they just feel like they need that
recognition. They feel like they need to
take care of themselves.
And again going back to what I was
saying earlier, like what do they go
through in their life that makes them
think that they got to look out for
themselves? And it'd be kind of nice if
I could be a person that they go, "Man,
this guy's
treating me really good."
And maybe I could help them transform
from someone that doesn't trust that
they're going to get the recognition
that they need to, hey, there's good
people out there and I'd like to be a
part of this team.
Were you ever successful in that
transformation?
I was successful. I was also
unsuccessful. You know, some people are
some people they have that defect and
it's strong and they're going to look
out for themselves and there's very
little you can do about it and you you
know, you try try um but it's it's a
very the ego is a very very powerful
thing. I mean, you know, the eagle is so
powerful that there's countless cases of
military history where a human being got
himself and possibly his troops or his
troops killed
because of his ego. So, if you can die
because of your ego, you can absolutely
make some pretty dramatic mistakes in
the business world because of your ego.
And it happens all the time. It happens
all the time.
leaving
leaving the military. I have this quote
where you said, "So, I'd say if there's
anything that I struggle with now, it's
just that does anything else matter?"
And the answer is no. The answer is no.
Nothing else matters. Nothing else is
close. So, I have to deal with that. You
said that on the Tim Ferrris podcast
talking about your time um in the
services, but also more specifically the
battle of Ramadi. Ramardia.
Mhm. um as being the highlight of your
life. How does one go through sort of 20
years of highintensity combat and all
that adrenaline and all of the you know
gosh it's harder to think of many
greater senses of like purpose and
fulfillment and mission and then
real life.
Yeah.
So, number one, as I mentioned earlier,
remember but don't dwell. And
have you seen the movie
Napoleon Dynamite? No, that's a bummer.
There's a character in the movie
Napoleon Dynamite. His name is Uncle
Rico. And Uncle Rico played football in
high school. And now Uncle Rico
uh lives in a van and sells cooking
wear. So he kind of peaked in high
school and he lives in the past. He's
always talking about state championships
and if he would have play had that extra
point and if coach would have put him
in, he's got he's living in the past.
And so
while that quote right there,
no doubt that you just read from me is
accurate. I mean
there there will not be I don't think
anything in my life that will have as
much intensity as much mission focus as
much meaning as much
as much opportunity as much loss like
that is combat is is like life but
amplified and intensified. So every
emotion that you have like you have an
emotion when you when you formulate a
new plan and when you sell a business or
buy a business you have emotions that's
like combat but it's amplified it's
intensified and it's it's a lot more so
the that quote that you read is true
nothing will compare to that it won't
but I don't want to be like Uncle Rico
living in the past talking about how
this is what it used to be like and if
Yeah, there's my big game. I don't want
to do that. I want to, as I said
earlier, I want to remember, but I don't
want to dwell on the past.
Has it ever crossed your mind to go back
in any capacity?
Oh, yeah. Of course. Yeah. Every time
like a every time a war breaks out
somewhere, you you you want to get your
get your knife out, sharpen it up, and
let's rock and roll. Of course, because
Yeah. Well, because of that quote right
there. like this is this is it. Like
that's that's it. I'm lucky that I got
to do what I got to do, you know? Like
that's a blessing. It's a it's the it's
what I wanted to do since I was a little
kid. I got to do it. And so if you asked
me if I got the chance to do it again,
would I? Yeah, I would 100%.
You could though, right? You could go be
involved in some capacity in the
Seals. Yeah, there's ways there's things
that I could do to, you know, like be a
guner again and all that, but there's
also it's also not the same. So, you
know, if I cuz I retired from the Navy
and and so I'm not in the military
anymore. I still work with the military.
I still train the military, but
to go and be a gunslinger again. Um, now
you're now you're doing something
different. Now you are a mercenary. Now
it's a different situation and
the that component that you talked about
of like mission
brotherhood
is not going to be the same for me and
and quite frankly I think that I
part of me
wants to
not sour
that memory and and all those memories.
I don't want to I don't want to,
you know, I don't I don't want to I
don't want to sour that memory. I I have
a beautiful beautiful memory and I don't
want to tarnish it with me chasing
around the past.
You know, when fighters, they retire
from fighting
and then they they just they they want
to go back, they do it again, and it's
just not the same.
Anderson Silva was like that for me. He
was Superman and then he went back a
couple of times and I didn't want to
watch him get beat up. It was like
Yeah. I that's how that's that's a I
feel like that. I feel like that. I
don't don't think I could rematch my my
Anderson Silva the Spider Championship
run. I don't think I could rematch that.
Discipline is freedom. It's the title of
your um your book here. Discipline
equals freedom. Now, that seems like
it's untrue because when people think of
discipline, they think of rigidity and
and taking away their freedom, having to
be disciplined.
Why is why does discipline equal
freedom?
Because the more discipline you have in
your life, the more freedom you will end
up with.
So if you lack the discipline to
exercise
and eat healthy, you will end up being
a slave to disease.
If you lack the discipline to work hard,
save your money,
you will end up a slave to finances.
If you lack the discipline to manage
your time correctly, you will end up
with no free time.
If you have
self-discipline, if you have the
discipline to save your money and work
hard and invest your money properly, if
you have the discipline to
manage your time correctly and not waste
a bunch of time, if you have the
discipline to exercise and eat healthy,
you will end up with freedom.
And it's I know it's a counterintuitive.
It's contrarian,
but
I've seen this over and over and over
again. If you want freedom in your life,
you have to have discipline.
There's going to be some kid listening
to this now. I always think about the
personas that are listening and they
are, you know, eating Doritos off their
belly.
Spit them out.
[Laughter]
Spit them out. Start now. Because if
you're a kid right now and you're eating
Doritos off your belly, I know they
taste good and there's some immediate
gratification, and I get that. But I'm
going to tell you, it starts right now,
throw that bag of Doritos away. Get rid
of it. Go do some push-ups. Go spend $12
at the hardware store and hang up a
pull-up bar in your room and start doing
pull-ups. And if you can't do one
pull-up, hang on that bar. And you're
going to start to get a little bit
stronger. You're going to start to get a
little bit healthier. You're going to
start to get more focused. You're going
to start to become more resilient. And
you're going to start to be able to do a
pull-up. And you're going to start to
eat healthy all the time. And you're
going to start to understand the world
better.
And you're going to start to progress in
every aspect of your life.
And you'll see that if you have that
kind of discipline right now,
you're going to end up with freedom.
And if you don't have that kind of
discipline
and you keep eating those Doritos
and you don't work hard and you don't
exercise and you don't apply yourself,
you're going to end up
you're going to end up shackled.
You're going up shackled by a boss that
you don't like doing a job that you
don't like to do with
sicknesses and diseases that you don't
want. Relying on people that you can't
even count on
alone
and you don't have to.
But if you have discipline,
if you have discipline, you will attain
freedom.
And it starts with just spitting the
Doritos out. Starts with spitting the
Doritos out. Yes, indeed.
How do you guys manage your stress? This
month is stress awareness month and it's
a topic that I'm super passionate about
and we talk about a lot on this podcast.
I personally manage my stress by
prioritizing my health and wellbeing.
Going to the gym is my number one form
of therapy and I couldn't be without
those two things. As you guys know,
Whoop is a sponsor of this podcast and
I'm an investor in the company as well.
For those of you that don't know, Whoop
actually created a stress monitor within
this device. Not only does this help me
to identify periods of high stress in
real time throughout the day, but it
also provides me with the tools I need
to deal with stresses as they come up
throughout the day. And it's based on
scientifically backed breathing
exercises and research that's been
developed by leading neuroscientists.
It's a feature that has been
gamechanging for me and I highly
recommend. If you're someone that's
looking to manage your stress levels,
then head over to join.woop.com/ceo
where we'll give you 30 days risk-free
and zero commitment to try Whoop. Let me
know how you get on. One of the things
you do, which is I mean you you're super
famous for it, is this idea of waking up
early. Now, I'm not someone that wakes
up early.
I know you no alarm clock and you're
usually up by 11:00. I I
Well, I So, no meetings before 11:00.
Okay, got it.
So, I I stay up quite late.
Y
um
what's the best case you could give me
for changing that?
And do I need to change that? Cuz I what
I what I do is, you know, I flew into
LA. I'm jetlagged. I'm flying back in a
couple of days. I'm going to be
jetlagged when I land as well. So, what
I'm trying to do is just protect my
sleep at all costs because I've come to
learn that it's really the foundation of
my performance. So if I if I'm unslept
and I show up at work, the chance that
I'm not going to show up correctly in a
variety of ways, emotionally,
creatively, whatever,
is high. And that for me is the greatest
risk.
So I just in the last sort of year or
two of my life, I've just said, "Okay,
prioritize sleep." Because then
everything else seems to follow. But
when I heard that you wake up sometimes
at 4:45 or 4:30, like pretty much all
the time, and you I've literally seen
you on social media upload your your
alarm clock day after day after day, I
go, "Shit, maybe I should rethink." No,
I think if you're if you've got a system
that's working well for you and then I
wouldn't change anything, right? If you
feel like you're performing well, you're
physically healthy, you're getting all
the work done that you need to do,
you're a naturally more of a a late
night, late morning type person, I'd run
with it. It's
if you were telling me, "Yeah, sometimes
I get up, sometimes I don't. Sometimes I
work late, sometimes I don't. I'm not
don't work out every day. You know,
sometimes I feel groggy." If you were
telling me that kind of thing, I'd say,
"Okay, pick a time and start waking up
at that time every day. Doesn't have to
be 4:40. It could be 8:00, could be
7:00, doesn't matter. Could be 11:00,
but try and go to bed around the same
time and try and wake up around the same
time. And that's going to be a great
foundation for everything that you're
doing. And I would say when you wake up
in the morning, do some kind of exercise
because I think that is very helpful in
getting your day started correctly.
What are your non-negotiables in your
life in terms of habits, routines,
disciplines? I wake up early and I work
out every day. That's that's kind of my
my that's that's that's those are the
minimum requirements
in my life.
Train jiu-jitsu. I I don't get to chain
train jiu-jitsu every single day. But if
I can train jiu-jitsu, I'm going to
train jiu-jitsu. I'm going to work out
every day.
If I can surf, I'm going to surf, you
know. Um I I obviously have to work
every day. I I work every day doing
something, you know. I've got a bunch of
different companies. I got to write
books, podcasts. So, I I work every day.
Are you ever undisiplined?
Oh, yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Um uh chocolate chip cookies.
They're a they're a a discipline
lapse for me. Uh yeah. So, yeah, I'm I'm
not a cyborg. When people look at
someone like you that's, you know, done
all the things you've done. You've been
a a seal and you've you've written all
these books and started these companies
and actually the drink I'm drinking now
is one of your your products which is
the what's that in front of you? The
Yeah, it's a it's an energy drink called
Go.
Called Go. Um, delicious by the way.
Oh, thank you.
I think my mouth has been connected to
my brain during this interview, so I
think it's working. Um, I understand
there's misconceptions that people have
of me because they assume it's kind of
like the halo effect. We assume because
someone's done something well, they do
all things well. Um, but there are so
many things that I think would really
liberate people and make them inspired
if they could see how deficient I was in
so many things in my life, you know,
because they just assume that if you've
done one thing, well, you have a good
podcast, you have a you must be like,
you know, the perfect picture of what
are the big misconceptions generally,
moving away from this idea of
imperfection, but just generally about
Joo because you've you realize you've
become a bit of a character, right? you
know, like Navy Seal that comes with an
identity package.
Yeah. I think the biggest misconception
I think and it's it's it's not just me,
but it's really the military in general
is the misconception of this kind of
authoritarian and even
authoritarian
dictatorship from a leadership
perspective. And even when when we were
having this conversation, I said, "I'm
going to let I'm going to let my
subordinates plan." And you kind of had
a stunned look on your face like, "What
are you talking about? Why would you let
your subordinates plan? And so there's
an idea and a misconception that
the leader is going to stand up and bark
all the orders. So that's one
misconception. The another one is I look
like a Neanderthal and so people are
think I'm going to scream and yell at
everybody. And I I never yell at
anybody. You know, I I my business
partner, Leif Babin, who's worked with
me, who's in my task unit at at SEAL
Team 3 and deployed to Ramati with me
and we now we've written a couple books
together. We have a business together
and he was like my direct subordinate in
Ramani and dur during a workup and
you know like never yelled at him and he
likes to point out that he gave me
plenty of reasons to yell at him but
never yelled at him cuz what what good
is that? And by the way, if I have to
yell at somebody, what does that say?
That means if I have to yell at you to
get my point across as a leader, I've
made like 47 other mistakes.
My goal is I don't even have to say
anything. That's my goal as a leader. My
goal is I don't have to say a word and
you already know what to do and you make
it happen. And I look at you and give
you a thumbs up and say good job. That's
my goal. So I think the biggest
misconception is the idea of someone in
the military or myself being a
authoritarian leader being very
close-minded. Like you know I I got
asked a question the other day about you
know if you were if you were if if China
attacked Taiwan and you were taking
troops in there what would you be
focused on? And I said, I'd be focused
on keeping an open mind because if you
have a closed mind about what the
mission is, about how it's going to
happen, about what your troops are going
to do, about what the enem is going to
do, if you have a closed mind about
those things,
you're going to get caught off guard.
You have to have an open mind. You have
to be accepting of the information that
you're receiving. You have to be
accepting of the other ideas that other
people have. And if you have a closed
mind, you're going to fall apart. kind
of counterintuitive in some ways because
the reason people often think they've
been made the leader because they have
loads of the correct ideas. So I think
as as people often climb in life they go
well I've been right so much that
they've put me here as CEO so now I need
to defend my righteousness at all costs
even when I'm not you know sure cuz
that's a weakness.
Yeah. And you quoted Steve Jobs earlier
and I I think actually actually it's
from your book which was I don't hire
people so I can tell them what to do. I
hire good people so they can tell me
what to do. So yes uh in your lead in a
leadership position you should be
listening more than you should be
talking.
You were talking a second ago about
shouting and aggression. It made me as
you're saying it, I was thinking, you
know, there is a stereotype that a man
is aggressive and he shouts and all
those things. You know, there's a bit of
a stereotype there. I what I was
actually thinking is
it's never been so unclear what a man is
than it than in 2024 in the context of
how a man's men are show up. Are they
meant to be masculine or feminine or
somewhere in between or whatever? And
for many men, you are a man's man. you
know, when we think of Navy Seals, we go
men.
Do you know what I mean? So, I I was
wondering because it's it's never been
as clear, I think, what a man should be,
you know, when you're raising a kid
that's a man or when you're being a man
yourself. Um, what do you think a man
should be?
And I I want to give a bit more context
here. There's a lot of men struggling
right now.
There's a lot of men if you know I talk
about it a lot that if you look at the
stats around suicidality in the UK the
thing that's most likely to kill someone
between the age of like 18 and 40 is
themselves
for a man you know there's a so men are
clearly struggling in some capacity with
purpose or or meaning or something. So,
I almost feel like, you know, a lot of
these sort of toxic influences of what a
man should be have now emerged to offer
answers, but I doubt those toxic
influences. And I say there's got to be
another role model, another sort of
blueprint for what it is to show up as a
man.
Well, I was going to give you a real I
guess it would have been a real cheap
answer of uh I think it's Marcus
Aurelius's stop discussing what it is to
be a man and be one. I was going to I
was going to walk out of here with that
one and be like, pretty good question
avoidance there. Um, which but there's
some merit to that, right? Like and and
I was almost thinking like do do we
really not know do we really not know
what it is to be a good man? And and I
would go so far as to say to be a good
human being, right? Because when a few
years ago there was these there was
these discussions going around about
toxic masculinity, right? And you take
these traditional masculine traits and
people were saying this is toxic
masculinity and they're bad and I wrote
a couple articles about it.
If you take any trait of a human being
and you take it to an extreme, masculine
or feminine or otherwise, you take it to
an extreme, it's it's going to be a
problem. It doesn't matter what it is.
So, if you take even a really positive
trait like
generosity, if you're a a super generous
person, that's wonderful. Is it possible
to be too generous? Well, yes, it is.
Now, you're getting taken advantage of
and now you end up in an abusive
relationship. Like, there's all kinds of
problems that can happen. So, when we
talk about masculine traits and what's a
man, well, what are some of the
traditional masculine traits? Um, to be
competitive.
Now, is it bad to be hyper competitive
where you
screw people over and you hurt your
health because you want to win in this
particular category? Is that bad? Yes,
it is. Does that mean we have people
that are not competitive at all and they
don't care if they win or lose? No,
that's not good either. So, that's
that's one trait. What's another good
masc aggression?
Aggression is a masculine trait. Is it
good if I'm walking into a restaurant
pushing the hostess out of my way? Of
course. That's terrible. That's
terrible. Is it good if you and I are
working together and I say, "Hey, shut
up and do what I said." Is that good?
No, it's not good.
So, can you take aggression too far?
Yes, you absolutely can. Can you get to
a point where you're not even asserting
yourself at all and you're getting W?
Yes, you can. Is that good? No, that's
not good either.
So, there's a bunch of traits that we
could run through that are considered
traditional masculine traits. And if you
take any of those traits and you take
them to an extreme, they're going to be
bad. Stoicism, right? Being stoic, being
unemotional. Is it is it good to have no
emotions whatsoever? No. That's called a
sociopath, right? Is that good? No. Is
it good, like I was talking about
earlier, to let your emotions run your
life and make your decisions based on
your emotions? No. That's not good
either. What do we want to be as a as a
human, as a man? Want to be balanced.
Want to be a want to be balanced. You
don't want to be extreme in any
direction. Even when you asked me like,
"Oh, Jo, what are you undisiplined on?"
I told you chocolate chip cookies. I
could have also said, "Uh, yeah,
sometimes I like to
eat uh mint chocolate chip milkshakes.
Sometimes I get lazy to work out. I'm
like, you know what? I freaking warmed
up and this sucks and I'm I'm leaving."
Uh, sometimes I'm supposed to I was
going to write something and now I
didn't write anything. I was supposed to
write a thousand words today. I didn't
write any. And guess what? I didn't
write any tomorrow. I I'm a slacker. So
if I was so disciplined that, you know,
my wife was like, "Hey, I'd like to go
out for dinner." I was like, "No, I
still got to write my thousand words."
Is that good? No, it's not good. So any
any characteristic, if we take it to
extreme, it's going to be a problem. And
so we as people should be balanced. And
I think
what we need to be attuned to is it's
it's much easier to be extreme. It's
it's it's much easier to say, "Oh,
no emotions. Cool." And turn them off.
That's easier than or or total emotion
mayhem. That's easier. It's harder to
find balance. It's harder to find
balance in business. It's harder to find
balance in life. It's hard to find
balance. And what we have to do is we
have to be attuned to the the feedback
that we're getting.
We have to be attuned to the feedback
that we're getting. So if we're talking
to our wife and she says you're not
going to be home for dinner again
tonight for the ninth night in a row
that you're going to stay late at work,
okay, you need to be paying attention
enough to say, "Oh yeah, guess what? I'm
a little too focused on work right now."
And then the other end of that spectrum
is my boss says, "Hey, Jo, wait. You're
leaving early again? Well, you know,
it's wrestling season. My my daughter's
got a wrestling match, so I'm I'm going
to leave." O, okay. I need to be attuned
enough to say, "Yeah, if I focus 100% on
my job, I'm going to lose my family. If
I focus 100% on my family, I'm going to
lose my job." We as humans are supposed
to be balanced. And by the way, there's
going to be some things that we don't
control. Somebody asked me the other
day,
"What did I learn
about myself
from the highs and lows of my life? The
highest point of my life and the lowest
point of my life. What did I learn about
myself?"
And I said, I learned that I don't let
the highs and the lows affect me too
much
because we're going to have wins, we're
going to have losses.
We're going to have successes, we're
going to have failures, we're going to
have good nights, we're going to have
bad nights, we're going to have good
relationships, we're going to have bad
relationships, we're gonna have good
ideas and bad ideas. We're going to make
money, we're going to lose money. All
these things are going to happen.
And if you oscillate emotionally
up and down drastically, it's going to
be problematic.
So finding a good, stable, centered way
to be
and look at the world and take
everything that you see with a little
bit of a grain of salt and don't get
swayed
too drastically. in one direction or the
other, you're going to be okay.
And if I was to try and sum up some of
this idea about being a man or being a
good human, it's like those books. I
wrote a book called Extreme Ownership.
That number one, take responsibility for
what you're doing. Take take ownership
of your world. Take ownership of your
life. There's number one. Number two,
the second book, Dichotomy of
Leadership. Be balanced.
Be balanced.
Don't be extreme. Extreme. Look, do you
have to sometimes get out there in the
in the fringes a little bit?
Occasionally, you probably had some
business situations where you're like,
"All right, I got to let go half of my
staff right now. That's an extreme move,
but that's how we're going to start." Do
you have to do that sometimes? Yes, you
do. But don't let that be where you
live. Live in the center. Live in a
stable area. And then finally,
discipline equals freedom. Couple of
words you use throughout this
conversation make me want to add some
things to that list of what it takes to
be a maybe not a good man but at least a
happy and fulfilled man. One of the
words you used is brotherhood. And I was
thinking about all the things you got
from your time in the seals and it's
almost a bit of like a microcosm of what
I think a lot of men are looking for.
You know that sense of purpose that
brotherhood and they find it these days
in like video games and stuff right
which I video games I've got no, you
know, I cost no judgment on people that
play video games. I've played video
games my whole life, but there's a it
seems like there's a reason we're
getting like increasingly addicted to
these video games cuz they're giving us
something that we're searching for in
real life and not getting. You use the
words brotherhood, purpose. These are
things that the SEALs clearly have in
huge huge amounts. Is there anything
else that you'd add to that list of what
it takes to feel fulfilled?
Yeah, jiu-jitsu.
It's it almost says become a joke
amongst
me, my friends, people that listen to me
is you got some kind of a problem in the
world. You got some kind of problem in
your life, go train jiu-jitsu. There's a
reason why I say that. Cuz the things
that you just mentioned, discipline.
Guess what you need to go train
jiu-jitsu when you're tired and you
don't feel like it? Discipline. Guess
how you feel when you're done? You feel
awesome. You get a bunch of dopamine.
Guess who you're there with? A bunch of
dudes that you can relate to. And guess
what you're going to do together? You're
going to struggle. You're going to go
through some some
hardship together. You're going to
sweat. You're going to choke. You're
going to get your arm broken. Like these
things are going to happen. Not going to
get your arm broken, but you may. But
you're going to you're going to be with
a little brotherhood. And by the way,
women train jiu-jitsu, too. My daughters
all train jiu-jitsu. It's all good. It's
all good. So yeah, jiu-jitsu is one way.
Now look, could you go to the rock
climbing gym? Yes, you could. Could you
go to the CrossFit gym? Yes, you could.
Could you go to the to the Yeah, the
soccer field, football field, whatever.
Yeah, you can do that stuff. So yeah, go
do that stuff. Go do that stuff. That's
shared suffering together with a group
on a regular basis, whether you want to
or not. That's some that's those are all
little components of being in the
military or being in the SEAL teams.
That's what it is. That's what you're
doing.
What does what does a SEAL platoon do?
They train to get ready for go to war.
How do they do that? They go to the
desert. They carry their guns. They run
through little choreographed moves. They
get hot. They carry weight. It's
suffering. It's just shared suffering
and they're working together and they're
learning skills. That's what you're
doing in a jiu-jitsu gym. That's what
you're doing on the soccer field. So, go
out and do those things with other human
beings and it's going to make it's going
to make things better for sure. It made
me think of business as well.
Business should be that way. If you if
you're in an organization,
you're doing the exact same thing,
right? We've got a problem. We need to
solve it. We've got to allocate
resources. We got to come in late
tonight. We got to make this thing
happen. We got an emergency. Like,
that's what a business is, too. That's
the way it should be. It should be.
We're working together to solve
problems. And when we're successful, we
get rewarded for that. So, yes, this is
called human interaction.
I'm sorry that it looks like war is the
best way to do it. It's not. I would
much rather people start a business and
create a product and and and create
jobs. I would much rather people do
that. And you can find that same kind of
camaraderie
in business. In fact, it's interesting.
You know, I I have a consulting business
and so we work with companies and
companies that went through the 2008
economic downfall, those they're so
bonded cuz they went through this
traumatic experience together. Companies
that that kind of did well out of the
gate, they're not people are leaving and
people are but companies that went
through some trauma together, they stick
together. So yeah, if you frame things
right in your life, if you frame things,
if you frame a business challenge as an
opportunity to build a stronger team,
if you if you frame a personal challenge
as an opportunity to overcome and
improve yourself,
these things that seem so horrible are
actually
very positive components. of your
existence and they're going to make you
better.
As you said that, I thought, damn, I
should take all of my teams. We should
go do like a survival week.
We have uh we we run a program like that
at Eson Front where we teach we teach
people like some basic tactics and we
have these high-speed laser tag guns and
we send them out on missions and there's
explosions and there's gunfire and
there's role players that are screaming
and yelling and it's it's mayhem. And
those teams that go through that, they
bond. They also learn how to make
decisions under pressure. They also
learn how to detach. They also learn the
fundamental principles of combat
leadership that you can apply not just
to the battlefield, but you can apply to
business and you can apply to your life
as well. So yes, is that helpful? It
absolutely is. Struggle sucks.
Depends on how you frame it,
right? Depends on how you frame it.
Cuz I'm thinking about you stood at the
beach at the, you know, and they say,
"Walk out, Jo. Link arms and walk out."
You describe that as sucking.
Yep.
But what you're also saying is there's
huge value in
things that suck. On the the other side
of something that sucks is something
worth cherishing.
I would say not just huge value, but the
value.
It's the value.
You want to know if you're a you were
talking about young men that might not
have any direction right now. Go do
something that's hard.
Go try and accomplish something that's
hard. You may win. You may lose. You may
succeed. You may fail. I'll tell you
what, you'll be better.
If you avoid those things that are hard,
if you don't accept that challenge, if
you don't step up and step into that
cold water and you sit on your couch and
eat Doritos,
I I I can tell you this is not a good
move. This is not a good move.
Don't do that. Don't do that. Just get
up, move towards that challenge.
Whatever that challenge is, move towards
that challenge and go attack it.
And you may be successful and you may
not be successful, but you will be
better.
And the next challenge you're going to
be more prepared for.
And the next challenge after that you're
going to be even more prepared for.
And you're going to fail. And you're
going to fail. And you're going to fail.
And you're going to fail. And then
you're going to win.
And that's life.
Life without those challenges.
It's existence.
Don't just exist.
Go live.
You used the word balance a second ago
and um from reading through your story
it appears that when you were in the
seals you didn't have a whole lot of
work life balance in whatever way people
will define work life balance and
talking specifically here about your
relationships your family your wife
I'm right in saying that you were out of
balance at through that season of life
in terms of you know yes I was out of
balance
I was out of balance.
I was out of balance,
but
the ship was still moving in the right
direction.
So, what does that mean? That means that
my wife
picked up the slack.
That's what she did.
So, I was out of balance. She recognized
it. She recognized that I had a job
and that that job was important. She
recognized that
I was going to war. I was taking I was
taking guys to war
my decisions
could mean the lives of these guys, the
deaths of these guys. My wife understood
that.
My wife understood that what I needed to
focus on at that time was making sure
that my guys and me were prepared for
war.
That has to be the focus. That has to be
the focus.
To not focus on that means I might not
be coming home. Means some of those guys
not might not be coming home.
She understood that. She knew that.
She stepped up. She I was out of
balance.
She was in balance. She pulled the
family unit into balance.
And And
I was I treated my wife like a princess.
My I mean I never I never I mean I gave
my wife everything except for time. I
could not always give her the time that
she deserved.
She never complained about it one time.
That's legit.
She knew.
She knew that and she understood it.
It's a team.
First law of combat leadership is cover
and move. We work together as a team.
While I was doing my job, while I was
serving the country,
she covered for me
where I couldn't deliver on the home
front.
With three kids and then four kids, she
covered the finances, the water heater
that's broken, the car tire that needs
changing. She did all that stuff.
I can see the emotion in your face when
you say that.
Where does that come from?
Where is that emotion?
That's appreciation.
It's appreciation. It's like
I'm gone and she's there. She doesn't
know what's going to happen to me.
Doesn't know if I'm coming home.
She got three freaking kids running
around.
Like, and this is my wife. Guess what?
There's hundreds of thousands of
military wives that did the same thing.
And spouses as well, cuz there's there's
guys that are married to females that go
on deployment as well,
that hold the line and and do the job on
the home front.
And you know, they they don't they don't
get the appreciation, the outward
appreciation, the recognition that the
people that are in the military get, but
they deserve it.
Do you think you could ever express the
gratitude you have for for her in words?
Do you think do you think it's possible
for her to know how much you appreciate
her for holding the line and for
covering you?
Do I think I could express it
in words?
Probably not. Does she know?
Yes, she does.
Jocker, we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest, not
knowing who they're leaving it for.
Mhm.
They leave it in this book.
Question that's been left for you.
If you could bring someone back who's no
longer with us and have a conversation
with them, who would it be and what
would that conversation entail?
Well,
I'd bring back Mark Lee, Mikey Monsour,
and Ryan Job.
And I tell him, "Thank you.
Thank you.
What would you be thanking them for?
Everything.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you for I mean the list is quite
ex extensive but thank you for putting
your life on the line to make the world
a better place. That's um I think a a
level of gratitude and appreciation that
we can't really express um in words to
people like you that put your lives on
the line and sometimes don't come back
from war and put your families through
it things that the average person
frankly wouldn't be willing to do um for
the sake of an important cause. Thank
you for that. Thank you on behalf of all
of the people that will never be able to
say it to you. Thank you for what you're
doing in this chapter of your life
because you are maybe whether you know
it or not, you are saving, improving,
and changing lives with everything you
do with your incredible podcast, with
all the books you've written. You've
written this, you know, you're writing
children's books as well now to try and
help shift the mindset of people at the
very while they're still seeds and
they're formative. And I think that's
also going to change improve lives. and
thank you for all the inspiration you've
given me over the years because you'll
never get to see all of the people who
hear a line that you say, the way that
you say it, the stories that you tell.
Um, and for some of those people, it's
just the subtle nud nudge that they need
to take that first step to spit the
Dorito out and to change their lives.
You know, when I when I think about my
friendship circle and I told told some
of my friends that I was speaking to you
today, those are young men and women
that can all pinpoint the moment where
they encountered you and they can
pinpoint how it moved their life forward
in some way. You'll never meet these
millions and millions of people, but I
just want you to know for sure that
they're there and they're watching now
and they've been watching and they'll
continue to watch. So, Joo, thank you.
It's been an honor. It was an honor to
serve and thanks for having me on here.
Appreciate it. Heat. Heat.
[Music]